[DOCS] How to introspect and partition a files based data store (#3464)
great-expectations/great_expectations: docs/guides/connecting_to_your_data/how_to_configure_a_dataconnector_to_introspect_and_partition_a_file_system_or_blob_store.md

- [Configured a Datasource and Data Connector](../../reference/datasources.md)
  
</Prerequisites>

We will use the "Yellow Taxi" dataset to walk you through the configuration of `Data Connectors` by starting with the
basic `Inferred Asset Data Connector`, then moving to a bare-bones `Configured Asset Data Connector`, and gradually
building out its configuration to achieve the introspection of your files with the semantics consistent with your goals.

To learn more about `Datasources`, `Data Connectors`, and `Batch(es)`, please see our [Datasources Core Concepts Guide](../../reference/datasources.md) in the [Core Concepts reference guide](../../reference/core_concepts.md).

## Preliminary Steps

### 1. Instantiate your project's DataContext

Import these necessary packages and modules.

```python file=../../../tests/integration/docusaurus/connecting_to_your_data/how_to_introspect_and_partition_your_data/files/yaml_example_gradual.py#L1-L5
```

Load your DataContext into memory using the `get_context()` method.

```python file=../../../tests/integration/docusaurus/connecting_to_your_data/how_to_introspect_and_partition_your_data/files/yaml_example_gradual.py#L7

> ```

Reviewer: I think Abe wanted to remove this since it is already covered in the prerequisites (e.g. "Configured and loaded a Data Context"). Though looking at that link does not show how to load a Data Context into memory. Maybe we should consider having a separate doc that shows how to load a context into memory for use in a notebook and then reference that in the prerequisites instead.

Author: @anthonyburdi As I understand, all Pre-Requisites will be revamped -- as separate PR(s).  Thanks.

component:

```python file=../../../tests/integration/docusaurus/connecting_to_your_data/how_to_introspect_and_partition_your_data/files/yaml_example_gradual.py#L9-L25
```

Using the above example configuration, add in the path to a directory that contains your data.  Then run this code to
test your configuration:

```python file=../../../tests/integration/docusaurus/connecting_to_your_data/how_to_introspect_and_partition_your_data/files/yaml_example_gradual.py#L33
```

Given that the `glob_directive` in the example configuration is `*.csv`, if you specified a directory containing CSV
files, then you will see them listed as `Available data_asset_names` in the output of `test_yaml_config()`.

Feel free to adjust your configuration and re-run `test_yaml_config()` to experiment as pertinent to your case.

An integral part of the recommended approach, illustrated as part of this exercise, will be the use of the internal
Great Expectations utility

```python
context.test_yaml_config(yaml_string, pretty_print: bool = True, return_mode: str = "instantiated_class", shorten_tracebacks: bool = False)

> ```

Reviewer: This is great - one small suggestion to put this on multiple lines so users don't have to scroll the code box
```suggestion
```python
context.test_yaml_config(
    yaml_string, 
    pretty_print: bool = True, 
    return_mode: str = "instantiated_class", 
    shorten_tracebacks: bool = False
)
```
```

Author: Fixed (in next commit).

```python file=../../../tests/integration/docusaurus/connecting_to_your_data/how_to_introspect_and_partition_your_data/files/yaml_example_gradual.py#L33
```

Notice that the output reports only one `data_asset_name`, called `DEFAULT_ASSET_NAME`, signaling a misconfiguration.

Now try another erroneous `DataConnector` configuration as part of your `Datasource` (you can paste it directly
underneath -- or instead of -- your existing `DataConnector` configuration sections):

```python file=../../../tests/integration/docusaurus/connecting_to_your_data/how_to_introspect_and_partition_your_data/files/yaml_example_gradual.py#L79-L88
```

where you would add in the path to a directory that does not exist; then run this code again to test your configuration:

```python file=../../../tests/integration/docusaurus/connecting_to_your_data/how_to_introspect_and_partition_your_data/files/yaml_example_gradual.py#L33
```

You will see that the list of `Data Assets` is empty.  Feel free to experiment with the arguments to

```python
context.test_yaml_config(yaml_string, pretty_print: bool = True, return_mode: str = "instantiated_class", shorten_tracebacks: bool = False)
```

> For instance, running

Reviewer: Just an optional suggestion to shorten since you show the full function signature above
```suggestion
You will see that the list of `Data Assets` is empty.  Feel free to experiment with the arguments to `context.test_yaml_config()` For instance, running
```

Author: Fixed the previous way.

---
title: How to introspect and partition a files based data store
---
import WhereToRunCode from './components/where_to_run_code.md'
import Prerequisites from '../connecting_to_your_data/components/prerequisites.jsx'

This guide will help you introspect and partition any files type data store (e.g., filesystem, cloud blob storage) using
the different types of the active `Data Connector`.  For background, please see the `Datasource` specific guides in the

> "Connecting to your data" section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide will help you introspect and partition any file based data store (e.g., filesystem, cloud blob storage) using
a `Data Connector`.
```
Just a suggestion

Author: @anthonyburdi I would like to keep the content of this one as is -- emphasizing the active `DataConnector` kind is important.  However, how do I make `and` appear in the red color?!

Author: Resolved together with @anthonyburdi

The file based data introspection and partitioning mechanisms in Great Expectations are useful for:
- Exploring the types, subdirectory location, and filepath naming structures of the files in your dataset, and

> - Organizing the discovered files into data assets according to the identified structures.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Organizing the discovered files into `Data Assets` according to the identified structures.
```

Author: Done!

Partitioning enables you to select the desired subsets of your dataset for [Validation](/docs/reference/validation).

<Prerequisites>

- [Configured and loaded a Data Context](../../tutorials/getting_started/initialize_a_data_context.md)
- [Configured a Datasource and Data Connector](../../reference/datasources.md)
  
</Prerequisites>

This guide will use the following `Datasource` configuration as an example:
```python file=../../../tests/integration/docusaurus/connecting_to_your_data/how_to_introspect_and_partition_your_data/files/yaml_example.py#L10-L48
```

To learn more about `Datasources`, `Data Connectors`, and `Batch(es)`, please see our [Datasources Core Concepts Guide](../../reference/datasources.md) in the [Core Concepts reference guide](../../reference/core_concepts.md). 

## Preliminary Steps

### 1. Choose how to run the code in this guide

<WhereToRunCode />

### 2. Instantiate your project's DataContext

Import these necessary packages and modules.

```python file=../../../tests/integration/docusaurus/connecting_to_your_data/how_to_introspect_and_partition_your_data/files/yaml_example.py#L1-L6
```

> Load your DataContext into memory using the `get_context()` method.

Reviewer: You might want to consider changing this for the `No CLI + no filesystem` tab to a link to the loading a context in memory guides.

Author: @anthonyburdi This comes from an imported `JavaScript` file.  Let us pair on this to see if anything can be done.  Thanks!

Author: Agreed with @anthonyburdi to file a JIRA ticket to fix the pre-requisite.

Author: `https://superconductive.atlassian.net/browse/GREAT-291` /cc @spencerhardwick

```

Given that the `glob_directive` in the example configuration is `*.csv`, if you specified a directory containing CSV
files, then you will see them listed as `Available data_asset_names` in the output of `test_yaml_config()`.

Feel free to adjust your configuration and re-run `test_yaml_config()` as needed.

### 4. Save the Datasource configuration to your DataContext

Save the configuration into your `DataContext` by using the `add_datasource()` function.

```python file=../../../tests/integration/docusaurus/connecting_to_your_data/how_to_introspect_and_partition_your_data/files/yaml_example.py#L58
```

## Introspection

### 1. Get names of available Data Assets
 
Getting names of available data assets using an `Inferred Asset Data Connector` gives you visibility into types and
naming structures of files in your filesystem or blob storage:

```python file=../../../tests/integration/docusaurus/connecting_to_your_data/how_to_introspect_and_partition_your_data/files/yaml_example.py#L59-L65
```

### 2.  Examine a few rows of a file

Pick a `data_asset_name` from the previous step and specify it in the `BatchRequest`:

> ```python file=../../../tests/integration/docusaurus/connecting_to_your_data/how_to_introspect_and_partition_your_data/files/yaml_example.py#L68-L77

Reviewer: Not critical but it might be more clear that the expectation suite is needed to get a validator (and not for the BatchRequest) if the `context.create_expectation_suite()` call is in the following code block where you run `context.get_validator()`

Author: Fixed!  Thanks!

```

> Then load data into the `Validator` and print a brief excerpt of the file's contents (`n_rows = 5` is the default):

Reviewer: I love that you are able to use the `.head()` method :) Just a suggestion for clarity of syntax at the expense of verbosity:
```suggestion
Then load data into the `Validator` and print a brief excerpt of the file's contents (`n_rows = 5` is the default, but you may look at more rows e.g. `validator.head(n_rows=100)`):
```

Author: Done!

```python file=../../../tests/integration/docusaurus/connecting_to_your_data/how_to_introspect_and_partition_your_data/files/yaml_example.py#L83-L86
```

> At this point, you can also perform additional checks, such as confirm the number of batches and the size of a batch.

Reviewer: Small stylistic nitpick
```suggestion
At this point, you can also perform additional checks such as confirming the number of batches and the size of a batch.
```

Author: Done!

configuration) to represent files in a directory, which contain a certain prefix (e.g., `yellow_trip_data_sample_`) and
whose contents are of the desired type (e.g., CSV).

```python file=../../../tests/integration/docusaurus/connecting_to_your_data/how_to_introspect_and_partition_your_data/files/yaml_example.py#L93-L97
```

For the present example, set `data_asset_name` to `taxi_data_flat` in the above `BatchRequest` specification.
(Customize for your own data set, as appropriate.)

Perform the relevant checks, such as confirm the number of batches and the size of a batch.
For example (be sure to adjust this code to match the specifics of your data and configuration):

```python file=../../../tests/integration/docusaurus/connecting_to_your_data/how_to_introspect_and_partition_your_data/files/yaml_example.py#L103-L105
```

### 2. Partition by year and month

Next, in recognition of a finer observed file path structure, you can refine the partitioning strategy.  For instance,
the `taxi_data_year_month` in our example configuration identifies three parts of a file path: `name` (as in "company

> name"), `year`, and `month`.  This partitioning affords a rich set of filtering capabilities randing from specifying the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
name"), `year`, and `month`.  This partitioning affords a rich set of filtering capabilities ranging from specifying the
```

Author: Done -- thank you!

exact values of the file name structure's components to allowing Python functions for implementing custom criteria.

To illustrate (using the present configuration example), set `data_asset_name` to `taxi_data_year_month` in the
following `BatchRequest` specification (customize for your own data set, as appropriate):

```python file=../../../tests/integration/docusaurus/connecting_to_your_data/how_to_introspect_and_partition_your_data/files/yaml_example.py#L109-L114
```

> To obtain the data for the nine months of February through October, apply the following custom filter:

Reviewer: ❤️

```python file=../../../tests/integration/docusaurus/connecting_to_your_data/how_to_introspect_and_partition_your_data/files/yaml_example.py#L119-L122
```

Now, perform the relevant checks, such as confirm the expected number of batches was retrieved, and the size of a batch:

```python file=../../../tests/integration/docusaurus/connecting_to_your_data/how_to_introspect_and_partition_your_data/files/yaml_example.py#L124-L126
```

You can then identify a particular batch (e.g., corresponding to the year and month of interest) and retrieve it for
data analysis as follows:

```python file=../../../tests/integration/docusaurus/connecting_to_your_data/how_to_introspect_and_partition_your_data/files/yaml_example.py#L130-L141
```

Note that in the present example, there can be up to three `BATCH_FILTER_PARAMETER` key-value pairs, because the regular

> expression for the data asset `taxi_data_year_month` defines three groups: `name`, `year`, and `month`.

Reviewer: Maybe just a small note about what happens when you omit a batch_filter_parameter?

Author: Done!

```
```python file=../../../tests/integration/docusaurus/connecting_to_your_data/how_to_introspect_and_partition_your_data/files/yaml_example.py#L192-L195
```

For the present example, we can split according to the "passenger_count" column with the focus on two-passenger rides:

```python file=../../../tests/integration/docusaurus/connecting_to_your_data/how_to_introspect_and_partition_your_data/files/yaml_example.py#L196-L200
```

We can then obtain a random `10%` of the rows in the batch:

```python file=../../../tests/integration/docusaurus/connecting_to_your_data/how_to_introspect_and_partition_your_data/files/yaml_example.py#L201-L202
```

Finally, confirm the expected number of batches was retrieved and the reduced size of a batch (due to sampling):

```python file=../../../tests/integration/docusaurus/connecting_to_your_data/how_to_introspect_and_partition_your_data/files/yaml_example.py#L204-L206
```

:::info
Currently, the configuration of `Splitting` and `Sampling` as part of the `YAML` configuration is not supported; it must
be done using `batch_spec_passthrough` as illustrated above.

> :::

Reviewer: ❤️ I love this info box, super helpful. And the splitting/sampling example is great :)

    | _sample_using_a_list              | column_name='col', value_list=<list[val]>                                                                                             | match the values in the named column against value_list, and only keep the matches                                                                                                        |
    +-----------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------	+
    | _sample_using_hash                | column_name='col', hash_digits=<int>, hash_value=<str>, hash_function_name=<'md5'>                                                    | hash the values in the named column (using specified has_function_name), and only keep rows that match the given hash_value                                                               |

>     +-----------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------	+

Reviewer: I love these tables! This information is super helpful. If it's not too much trouble though could they be a bit narrower to limit horizontal scrolling? Also some of the formatting is a bit off, e.g. in the splitter parameters there are extra tab characters in the dictionaries.

Author: @anthonyburdi Formatting these markdown tables is excruciatingly slow -- I will do what I can at the end.  Thanks!

Reviewer: Totally understand - thank you for taking a look :)

Author: @anthonyburdi Some fixes done (removed unnecessary tabs from parameters.

---
title: How to configure a DataConnector to introspect and partition a file system or blob store
---
import WhereToRunCode from './components/where_to_run_code.md'
import Prerequisites from '../connecting_to_your_data/components/prerequisites.jsx'

> This guide will help you introspect and partition any files type data store (e.g., filesystem, cloud blob storage) using

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This guide will help you introspect and partition any file type data store (e.g., filesystem, cloud blob storage) using
```

Author: @abegong: Incorporated.

> the different types of the active `Data Connector`.  For background on connecting to different backends, please see the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
an `Active Data Connector`.  For background on connecting to different backends, please see the
```

Note: in the future, we should link to an Active Data Connector doc, but no such doc exists yet.

Author: @abegong: Incorporated.

`Datasource` specific guides in the "Connecting to your data" section.

> The file based data introspection and partitioning mechanisms in Great Expectations are useful for:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
File-based introspection and partitioning are useful for:
```

Author: @abegong: Incorporated.
